Add DevDay blog and some modifications (#184)
oskariorg/oskari-documentation-site: _content/blog/2025-04-04_Greetings_from_Developers_Day.md

## Oskari 3.0 and React migration

Oskari's technical coordinator Sami Mäkinen presented at the beginning of the event what was new in Oskari's new major release. Of course, the biggest thing in the new version is the upgrade of the Java version from 8 to 17, in addition to which many background libraries have been updated. Many of the old jQuery components have been removed from the front-end and replaced with React.

A major leap was also that creating bundles was made significantly easier. Now a bundle can be just one .js file, while previously creating a bundle required creating different files in different locations. The new example bundle also has a lot of comments along with the code, so that creating bundles would be clearer for new developers. (See [the new SampleInfoBundleInstance.js file in GitHub](https://github.com/oskariorg/sample-application/blob/master/bundles/sample-info/SampleInfoBundleInstance.js))

Pekka Helesuo from Siili presented the changes made to the map publisher. The old jQuery code has been converted to React in many parts and the documentation on the subject has also been updated regarding the changes.

> However, jQuery can still be found in Oskari, and for example, the Drag and drop-based moving of tools in the map publisher has been implemented from there. However, the React migration was advanced so much that the work on Oskari 3.0 is at a fairly good stage and many parts have been completed as a good whole. The abandonment of jQuery will continue with the following updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, jQuery can still be found in Oskari, and for example, the Drag and drop-based moving of tools in the map publisher has been implemented with jQuery. However, the React migration was advanced so much that the work on Oskari 3.0 is at a fairly good stage and many parts have been completed as a good whole. The abandonment of jQuery will continue with the following updates.
```

Timo Aarnio spoke about the RPC functionalities developed in Gispo's Oskari project. During the project they had to add more functions to RPC, because the existing ones were not sufficient for the customer's needs. For example, the getGroupsWithLayerIds developed in the project returns map layers and map layer groups that belong to the desired group. This enables one’s own implementation of the map layer menu, and returns only those map layers that the user has access to. Another functionality developed uses the description information of map layers as a lightweight version of the layer metadata, which means that a metadata service (such as CSW) is not needed.

The code for the functions is available on GitHub and has also been imported into Oskari 3.0:
https://github.com/oskariorg/oskari-frontend/pull/2815
https://github.com/oskariorg/oskari-frontend/pull/2807

## CSW API for showing metadata

> Sitowise has been involved in the maintenance and development for many Oskari instances for several organizations. One of their clients needed to publish map layers that are only visible to some of the service's logged in users. This is of course easily done in Oskari using user roles to restrict access to certain layers, but the requirement also applied to the metadata of the layers. The metadata needed to be somewhere else than in the public Paikkatietohakemisto, where the metadata is usually located for layers published to Oskari instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sitowise has been involved in the maintenance and development for many Oskari instances for several organizations. One of their clients needed to publish map layers that are only visible to some of the service's logged in users. This is of course easily done in Oskari using user roles to restrict access to certain layers, but the requirement also applied to the metadata of the layers. The metadata needed to be somewhere else than in the public metadata catalog Paikkatietohakemisto , that contains public metadata for spatial data in Finland and which is usually used as metadata source for Oskari-based geoportals showing data from Finland. 
```

> Arttu Pietarinen from Sitowise presented the process where a CSW plugin was installed to GeoServer. The plugin then exports the metadata to a closed CSW interface. CSW is an interface in accordance with the INSPIRE directive that provides metadata according to the standard. Both the layers intended for internal use and their metadata can be thus published through the same GeoServer. Oskari, in turn, reads from each layers’ “metadataURL” field whether the layer has metadata in the CSW interface or not, and displays it to the end user. If the layer doesn’t have metadata in the CSW interface, Oskari retrieves the metadata normally from Paikkatietohakemisto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arttu Pietarinen from Sitowise presented the process where a CSW plugin was installed to GeoServer. The plugin can be used to provide metadata for layers in GeoServer as a CSW service. CSW is an interface in accordance with the INSPIRE directive that provides metadata according to the standard. Both the layers intended for internal use and their metadata can be thus published through the same GeoServer. Through the Oskari admin user-interface, admin users can define a `metadataURL` attribute for layers that can be used to switch the metadata source for that layer to a custom one. When the end-users look at the layer metadata, it is then fetched from either the layer specific CSW service or defaulted to the globally configured CSW service (usually Paikkatietohakemisto in Finland).
```

## Oskari 3.0. updating project between Sitowise, Finnish Transport Infrastructure Agency and MML

> The participants of Developers’ Day also heard about the developers' experiences with the update process for 3.0 released in March. The work involved four people and testers from the National Land Survey of Finland, as well as two developers from Sitowise and Sitowise's own tester.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The participants of Developers’ Day also heard about the developers' experiences with the co-operation of two separate software development teams across two organizations, working together to get everything ready for the Oskari 3.0 released in March. The work involved four people and testers from the National Land Survey of Finland, as well as two developers from Sitowise and Sitowise's own tester.
```

The collaboration was based on the mutual needs of NLS FI, Finnish Transport Infrastructure Agency and Sitowise. The National Land Survey of Finland needed to update the Java and Spring major versions of Oskari, while Sitowise has several Oskari instances under maintenance and development, including the Finnish Transport Infrastructure Agency's Oskari project, where concerns were raised about Oskari's security vulnerabilities. Major updates contain easily destructible changes, and via the joint project, Sitowise was able to find and fix them, too.

Discussions about the joint project between the parties began in the fall of 2024, and the project itself began in mid-January 2025. Sami Mäkinen from NLS FI made a preliminary plan, which was varied as necessary, and the team had a daily meeting every day to monitor the progress of the updates.

> The update was carried out as a project, in which an attempt was made to tie the teams as closely as possible to the updating. Arttu Pietarinen, who presented the joint project, was particularly happy about the project-based working method which made the entire process easier: The National Land Survey of Finland and Sitowise had their own teams and a common goal. The intensive working method, in which employees were tied to the project, also lowered the threshold for asking for help from each other. Problems encountered in the updates and their solutions were also easily found, as Sitowise's developers imported the changes directly into the Väylä Map service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The update was carried out as a project, in which an attempt was made to tie the teams as closely as possible to the updating. Arttu Pietarinen, who presented the joint project, was particularly happy about the project-based working method which made the entire process easier: The National Land Survey of Finland and Sitowise had their own teams and a common goal. The intensive working method, in which employees were tied to the project, also lowered the threshold for asking for help from each other. Challenges encountered in the updates and their solutions were also easily found, as Sitowise's developers imported the changes directly into the Väylä Map service.
```
